# Sex Differences In Short Term Patient Outcomes Following Platelet Rich Plasma Injections For Knee Osteoarthritis

Link: https://www.oarsijournal.com/article/S1063-4584(24)00519-3/fulltext

Abstract 

Purpose (the aim of the study): Osteoarthritis (OA), a highly prevalent degenerative disease affecting over 595 million individuals worldwide, is projected to increase by substantial percentages globally by 2050, particularly in the knee, hand, and hip joints. This study focuses on short-term patient outcomes from platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections as a non-surgical treatment for knee OA, examining the intricate relationship between cytokines, growth factors, and neutrophils, while revealing the need for further research on the impact of biological sex on PRP treatment efficacy for knee OA patients. The aim of this study is to determine the influence of biological sex on short term patient outcomes following PRP injections for knee OA.

Methods: Patient reported outcome (PRO) data following PRP injections for knee OA was retrospectively collected from our clinic wide PRP database, 94 patients, 49 females (Age: 61.2±12 years, BMI 25.8±4.22, Height 1.65±0.081 meters, Weight 70.4±12.3 kg) and 45 males (Age: 62.4±13.3 years, BMI 28.2±4.31, Height 1.81±0.082 meters, Weight 92.8±18.2 kg), were included in the final analysis. Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS) pain interference, PROMIS physical function, Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) short form, pain-medication use, and return to activity were collected up to one-year post-injection. Patient PRO data was excluded due to the following criteria: previous ipsilateral knee surgery, previous or subsequent PRP injection for the ipsilateral knee, or no survey response data for the one-year follow-up period. Linear mixed model (LMM) analyses were performed for PROMIS pain interference, PROMIS physical function, and KOOS short form scores to compare males vs. females of all OA grade patients over time. Logistic mixed-effects regression models were used to determine sex differences in the odds of needing pain medication and the odds of returning to activity six months post-injection.

Results: Statistical significance was set at α=0.05 for LMM analyses and data up to one-year post-injection was included in this preliminary analysis. There was interaction effect (p=0.026) of sex and time for PROMIS pain interference scores across all OA grade patients, where females experienced a slower rate of pain reduction relative to males following PRP injections for knee OA. There were no statistically significant differences in PROMIS physical function or KOOS SF scores over time, between sexes, or an interaction of these variables for all OA grade patients (p>0.05). The odds of using pain medication at 3-months post-injection was not statistically different (p>0.05) between female and male patients across all OA grades. There were no significant associations (p>0.05) in the odds of returning to activity at 3 months post-injection between female and male patients with moderate and severe OA diagnoses. In the mild OA group, the odds of returning to activity 3 months post-injection were significantly greater (p=0.005) in males compared to females.

Conclusions: These preliminary findings suggest that PRP injections for patients with all severities of knee OA may be more effective at reducing perceived pain in biological males compared to females. Additionally, the data suggests there are no significant sex differences in physical function over a 1-year follow up period. The short term, post-injection odds of using pain medication and returning to activity were not different between sexes. Further data collection and analysis will be conducted as a greater proportion of patients reach to the 2-year follow up timepoint to provide more data on sex differences in patient outcomes from PRP injections.
